#Introduction and Essential Concepts
##Files and the Filesystem
An open file is referenced via an unique descriptor, called file descriptor, abbreviated fd.

A single file can ben **opened more than once**, by a different or even the same process. Each open instance of a file is given a unique file descriptor. Conversely, processes can share their file descriptors, allowing a single descriptor to be **used by more than one process**.

A file is referenced by an *inode*, which stores metadata associated with the file, such as its modification timestamp, owner, type, length, and the location of the file's data.

Directories are used to provide the names with which to access file. A directory acts as a mapping of human-readable names to inode numbers. A name and inode pair is called a *link*.

given a file name -> open directory(which has associated inodes) and search name -> obtain inode number -> find on-disk location

Deleting a file involves unlinking it from the directory structures, which is done simply by removing its name and inode pair from a directory. Cause Linux supports *hard links*, to ensure that a file is not destroyed until all links to it are removed, each inode contains a link count that keeps track of the number of links within the filesystem that points to it.

A *symbolic* link has its own inode and data chunk, which contains the complete pathname of the linked-to file. A symbolic link that points to a nonexistent file is called a *broken link*.

**Special files**: block device files, character device files, named pipes and Unix domain sockets.

**Filesystems and namespaces**: The smallest addressable unit on a block device is a sector. The sector is a physical attribute of the device. Sectors come in various powers of two, with 512 bytes being quite common. A block of device cannot transfer or access a unit of data smaller than a sector and all I/O must occur in terms of one or more sectors. Likewise, the smallest logically addressable unit on a filesystem is the block(an abstraction of the filesystem, generally larger than the sector, but smaller than the page size).
##Proceses
The most important and common sections are the text section, the data section and the bss section. The text section contains executable code and read-only data. The data section contains initialized data. The bss section contains uninitialized global data.

A thread consists of a stack, processor state, and a current location in the object code.
##Users and Groups
Authorization in Linux is provided by users and groups. Each process has a real uid, an effective uid, a saved uid and a filesystem uid.
##Permissions
Each file is associated with an owning user, an owning group, and three sets of permission bits.
##Signals
Signals are a mechanism for one-way asynchronous notifications. A signal may be sent from the kernel to a process, from a process to another process, or from a process to itself.

Signals interrupt an executing process, causing it to stop whatever it is doing and immdiately perform a predetermined action.
##Interprocess Communication
pipes, semaphores, message queues, shared memory and futexes.