#File I/O
The kernel maintains a per-process list of open files, called the file table. This table is indexed via nonnegative integers known as file descriptors. Each entry in the list contains information about an open file, including a pointer to an in-memory copy of the file's backing inode and associated metadata(file positions and access modes etc).

##Opening Files
###The open() System Call
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fcntl.h>

int open(const char *name, int flags);
int open(const char *name, int flags, mode_t mode);
```

***flags for open()***

O_APPEND (append mode)

O_SYNC (a signal will be generated when the specified file becomes readable or writable)

O_CLOEXEC (Upon executing a new process, the file will automatically be closed)

O_CREAT (create the file if not exists, has not effect unless O_EXCL is also given)

O_DIRECT (opened for direct I/O)

O_DIRECTORY (If name is not a directory, the call to open() will fail)

O_EXCL (when given with O_CREAT, this flag will cause the call to open() to fail if the file given by name already exists)

O_LARGEFILE (be opened using 64-bit offsets, allowing the manipulation of files larger than two gigabytes)

O_NOATIME+ (file's last access time is not updated upon read)

O_NOCTTY (If the given name refers to a terminal device, it will not become the process's controlling terminal)

O_NOFOLLOW (If name is a symbolic link, the call to open() will fail)

O_NONBLOCK (the file will be opened in nonblocking mode)

O_SYNC (opened for synchronous I/O. No write will complete until the data has been physically written to disk)

O_TRUNC (in writing mode, the file will be truncated to zero length)

***mode for open()***

S_IWUSR (Owner has write permission)

S_IXUSR (Owner has execute permission)

S_IRWXG (Owner has read, write and exeucte permission)

S_IRGRP (Group has read permission)

S_IWGRP (Group has write permission)

S_IXGRP (Group has execute permission)

S_IRWXO (Everyone else has read, write and execute permission)

S_IROTH (Everyone else has read permission)

S_IWOTH (Everyone else has write permission)

S_IXOTH (Everyone else has execute permission)

###The creat() function
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fcntl.h>

int creat(const char *name, mode_t mode);

// eg:
int fd;

fd = creat(filename, 0644);
// identical to
// fd = open(filename, O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, 0644);
```

##Reading via read()
```C
#include <unistd.h>

ssize_t read(int fd, void *buf, size_t len);
```
###Return Values
- The call returns a value equal to len. All len read bytes are stored in buf.
- The call returns a value less than len, but greater than zero. This can occur because a signal interrupted the read midway; an error occurred in the middle of the read; more than zero, but less than len bytes' worth of data was available; or EOF was reached before len bytes were read.
- The call returns 0. This indicates EOF.
- The call blocks because no data is currently available. This won't happen in nonblocking mode.
- The call returns -1, and errno is set to EINTR. (a signal was received before any bytes were read, which can be reissued).
- The call returns -1, and errno is set to EAGAIN. (the read would block because no data is currently available, which can be reissued, happen in nonblocking mode only).
- The call returns -1, and errno is set to a value other than EINTR or EAGAIN(indicates a more serious error).

###Reading all the bytes
```C
ssize_t ret;

while (len != 0 && (ret = read(fd, buf, len)) != 0) {
	if (ret == -1) {
		if (errno == EINTR)
			continue;
		perror("read");
		break;
	}
	
	len -= ret;
	buf += ret;
}
```

###Nonblocking reads
```C
char buf[BUFSIZ];
ssize_t nr;

start:
nr = read(fd, buf, BUFSIZ);
if (nr == -1) {
	if (errno == EINTR)
		goto start;
	if (errno == EAGAIN)
		/* resubmit later */
	else
		/* error */
}
```

###Other error values
EBADF (The given file descriptor is invalid or is not open for reading)

EFAULT (The pointer provided by buf is not inside the calling process's address space)

EINVAL (The file descriptor is mapped to an object that does not allow reading)

EIO (A low-level I/O error occured)

###Size limits on read()
ssize_t type is a signed version of size_t. The maximum value of size_t is SIZE_MAX; the maximum value of an ssize_t is SSIZE_MAX. If len is larger than SSIZE_MAX, the results of the call to read() are undefined.

##Writing with write()
```C
#include <unistd.h>

ssize_t write(int fd, const void *buf, size_t count);
```

###Partial writes
```C
ssize_t ret, nr;

while(len != 0 && (ret = write(fd, buf, len)) != 0) {
	if (ret == -1) {
		if (errno == EINTR)
			continue;
		perror("write");
		break;
	}
	
	len -= ret;
	buf += ret;
}
```

###Other error codes
EBADF (The given file descriptor is not valid or is not open for writing)

EFAULT (The pointer provided by buf points outside of the process's address space)

EFBIG (The write would have made the file larger than per-process maximum file, or internal implementation, limits)

EINVAL (The given file descriptor is mapped to an object that is not suitable for writing)

EIO (A low-level I/O error occurred)

ENOSPC (The filesystem backing the given file descriptor does not have sufficient space)

EPIPE (The given file descriptor is associated with a pipe or socket whose reading end is closed. The process will also receive a SIGPIPE signal)

###Behavior of write()
When a call to write() returns, the kernel has copied the data from the supplied buffer into a kernel buffer, but there is no guarantee that the data has been written out to its intended destination.

delayed writes issues

- The delayed writes do not change POSIX semantics.
- the inability to enforce write ordering.
- the reporting of certain I/O errors.(any I/O error that occurs during writeback cannot be reported back to the process that issued the write request)

how to minimize the risks of deferred writes
- the kernel institutes a maximum buffer age and writes out all dirty buffers before the mature past the given value(/proc/sys/vm/dirty_expire_centisecs)
- it's possible to force the writeback of a given file's buffer, or even to make all writes synchronous

##Synchronized I/O
###fsync() and fdatasync()
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int fsync(int fd);
int fdatasync(int fd);
```
A call to fsync() ensures that all dirty data(both data and metadata) associated with the file mapped by the file descriptor fd are written back to disk. fsync() always results in at least two I/O operations: one to write back the modified data and one to update the inode's modification timestamp.

fdatasync() only flushes data and metadata required to properly access the file in the future.

Neither function guarantees that any updated directory entries containing the file are synchronized to disk.

**Return values and error codes**

On sucess, both calls return 0. On failure, both calls return -1 and set errno to one of the following three values:

- EBADF (the given file descriptor is not a valid file descriptor)
- EINVAL (the given file descriptor is mapped to an object that does not support synchronization)
- EIO (a real I/O error, and is often the place where such errors are caught)

###sync()
```C
#include <unistd.h>

void sync(void);
```
All buffers--both data and metadata--are guaranteed to reside on disk. The only real use for sync() is in the implementation of the sync utility. Applications should use fsync() and fdatasync() to commit to disk the data of only the requisite file descriptors. Note that sync() may take serveral minutes or longer to complete on a busy system.

###The O_SYNC Flag
The O_SYNC flag may be passed to ope(), indicating that all I/O on the file should be synchronized:

```C
int fd;

fd = open(file, O_WRONLY | O_SYNC);
if (fd == -1) {
	perror("open");
	return -1;
}
```

###O_DSYNC and O_RSYNC
The O_DSYNC flag specifies that only normal data be synchronized after each write operation, not metadata.

The O_RSYNC flag specifies the synchronization of read requests as well as write requests.It must be used with one of O_SYNC or O_DSYNC.

##Direct I/O
The linux kernel, like any modern operating system kernel, implements a complex layer of caching, buffering, and I/O management between devices and applications. Providing the O_DIRECT flag to open() instructs the kernel to minimize the presence of I/O management. When this flag is provided, I/O will initiate directly from user-space buffers to the device, bypassing the page cache. All I/O will be synchronous.

##Closing Files
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int close(int fd);
```
A call to close() unmaps the open file descriptor fd and disassociates the file from the process. A call to close() returns 0 on success. On error, it returns -1 and sets errno appropriately.

Closing a file has no bearing on when the file is flushed to disk. You should use the synchronized options discussed earlier.

##Seeking with lseek()
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

off_t lseek(int fd, off_t pos, int origin);
```
origin argument:

- SEEK_CUR (the current file position of fd is set to its current value plus pos)
- SEEK_END (the current file position of fd is set to the current length of the file plus pos)
- SEEK_SET (the current file position of fd is set to pos)

###Seeking Past the End of a File
Seeking past the end of a file does nothing--a read request to the newly created file position will return EOF. If a write request is subsequently made to this position, however, new space will be created between the old length of the file and new length, and it will be padded with zeros.

###Error Values
On error, lseek() return -1 and errno is set as follows:

- EBADF (the given file descriptor does not refer to an open file descriptor)
- EINVAL (the value given for origin is not one of SEEK_SET, SEEK_CUR, or SEEK_END, or the resulting file position would be negative)
- EOVERFLOW (the resulting file offset cannot be represented in an off_t)
- ESPIPE (the given fd is associated with an unseekable object, such as a pipe, FIFO, or socket)

##Positional Reads and Writes
```C
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include <unistd.h>

ssize_t pread(int fd, void *buf, size_t count, off_t count);
```
This call reads up to count bytes into buf from the file descriptor fd at file position pos, and does not update the file position.
```C
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 500
#include <unistd.h>

ssize_t pwrite(int fd, const void* buf, size_t count, off_t pos);
```
This call writes up to count bytes from buf to the file descriptor fd at file position pos.

**pread()&pwrite() vs read()&write()**

- ignore the current file position, use the value provided by pos instead of current file location
- easier to use
- avoid race conditions

##Truncating Files
```C
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/types.h>

int ftruncate(int fd, off_t len);
int truncate(const char *path, off_t len);
```
The most common use of these system calls is to truncate a file to a size smaller than its current length. They can also be used to "truncate" a file to a larger size. The extended bytes are filled with zeros. Neither operation updates the current file position.

##Mutiplexed I/O
Multiplexed I/O allows an application to concurrently block on multiple file descriptors and receive notification when any one of them becomes ready to read or write without blocking.

Linux provides three multiplexed I/O solutions: the select, poll and epoll interfaces.

###select()
```C
#include <sys/select.h>

int select(int n, 
			fd_set *readfds,
			fd_set *writefds,
			fd_set *exceptfds,
			struct timeval *timeout);

FD_CLR(int fd, fd_set *set);
FD_ISSET(int fd, fd_set *set);
FD_SET(int fd, fd_set *set);
FD_ZERO(fd_set *set);

#include <sys/time.h>
struct timeval {
	long tv_sec;   /* seconds */
	long tv_usec;  /* microseconds */
};
```
A call to select() blocks until the given file descriptors are ready to perform I/O, or until an optionally specified timeout has elapsed.

On successful returns, each set is modified such that it contains only the file descriptors that are ready for I/O of the type delineated by that set.

The first parameter, n, is equal to the value of the highest-valued file descriptor in any set, plus one.

FD_ZERO removes file descriptors from the specified set. It should be called before every invocation of select().

FD_SET adds a file descriptor to a given set, and FD_CLR removes a file descriptor from a given set.

FD_ISSET tests whether a file descriptor is part of a given set. It returns a nonzeor integer if the file descriptor is in the set and 0 if it is not. FD_ISSET is used after a call from select() returns to test whether a given file descriptor is ready for action.

####Return values and error codes
On success, select() returns the number of file descriptors ready for I/O, among all three sets. If a timeout was provided, the return value may be 0. On error, the call returns -1, and errno is set as follows:

- EBADF (invalid fd was provided in one of the sets)
- EINTR (a signal was caught while waiting, and the call can be reissued)
- EINVAL (the parameter n is negative, or the given timeout is invalid)
- ENOMEM (insufficient memory was available to complete the request)

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/time.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

#define TIMEOUT 5
#define BUF_LEN 1024

int main(void)
{
	struct timeval tv;
	fd_set readfds;
	int ret;
	
	/* Wait on stdin for input. */
	FD_ZERO(&readfds);
	FD_SET(STDIN_FILENO, &readfds);
	
	/* Wait up to five seconds. */
	tv.tv_sec = TIMEOUT;
	tv.tv_usec = 0;
	
	/* All right, now block! */
	ret = select(STDIN_FILENO + 1, 
				  &readfds, 
				  NULL,
				  NULL,
				  &tv);
	if (ret == -1) {
		perror("select");
		return 1;
	} else if (!ret) {
		printf("%d seconds elapsed.\n", TIMEOUT);
		return 0;
	}
	
	/*
	* Is our file descriptor ready to read?
	* (It must be, as it was the only fd that
	* we provided and the call returned
	* nonzero, but we will humor ourselves.)
	*/
	if (FD_ISSET(STDIN_FILENO, &readfds)) {
		char buf[BUF_LEN+1];
		int len;
		
		/* guaranteed to not block */
		len = read(STDIN_FILENO, buf, BUF_LEN);
		if (len == -1) {
			perror("read");
			return 1;
		}
		
		if (len) {
			buf[len] = '\0';
			printf("read: %s\n", buf);
		}
		
		return 0;
	}
	
	fprintf(stderr, "This should not happen!\n");
	return 1;
}
```

####pselect()
```C
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 600
#include <sys/select.h>

int pselect(int n, 
			fd_set *readfds, 
			fd_set *writefds, 
			fd_set *exceptfds, 
			const struct timespec *timeout,
			const sigset_t *sigmask);
			
/* these are the same as those used by select() */
FD_CLR(int fd, fd_set *set);
FD_ISSET(int fd, fd_set *set);
FD_SET(int fd, fd_set *set);
FD_ZERO(fd_set *set);

#include <sys/time.h>
struct timespec {
	long tv_sec;  /* seconds */
	long tv_nsec; /* nanoseconds */
};
```

####difference between pselect() and select():

- pselect() uses the timespec structure, not the timeval structure, for its timeout parameter.
- A call to pselect() does not modify the timeout parameter.
- The select() system call does not have the sigmask parameter.

###poll()
```C
#include <poll.h>

int poll(struct pollfd *fds, nfds_t nfds, int timeout);

struct pollfd {
	int fd;			/* file descriptor */
	short events;	/* requested events to watch */
	short revents;	/* returned events witnessed */
};
```
Each `pollfd` structure specifies a single file descriptor to watch. Multiple structures may be passed, instructing `poll()` to watch multiple file descriptors. 

The `events` field of each structure is a bitmask of events to watch for on that file descriptor. The user sets this field.

The `revents` field is a bitmask of events that were witnessed on the file descriptor. The kernel sets this field on return. All of the events requested in the `events` field may be returned in the `revents` field.

Valid events are as follows:

- POLLIN (there is data to read)
- POLLRDNORM (there is normal data to read)
- POLLRDBAND (there is priority data to read)
- POLLPRI (there is urgent data to read)
- POLLOUT (writing will not block)
- POLLWRNORM (writing normal data will not block)
- POLLWRBAND (writing priority data will not block)
- POLLMSG (a SIGPOLL message is available)

the following events may be returned in the `revents` field:

- POLLER (error on the given file descriptor)
- POLLHUP (hung up event on the given descriptor)
- POLLNVAL (the given file descriptor is invalid)

`POLLIN | POLLPRI` is equivalent to `select()`'s read event, and `POLLOUT | POLLWRBAND` is equivalent to `select()`'s write event. `POLLIN` is equivalent to `POLLRDNORM | POLLRDBAND`, and `POLLOUT` is equivalent to `POLLWRNORM`.

The `timeout` parameter specifies the length of time to wait, in milliseconds, before returing regardless of any ready I/O. A negative value denotes an infinite timeout. A value of 0 instructs the call to return immediately, listing any file descriptors with pending ready I/O, but not waiting for any further events.

####Return values and error codes

On succes, `poll()` returns the number of file descriptors whose structures have nonzero `revents` fields. It returns 0 if the timeout occurred before any events occurred. On failure, -1 is returned, and errno is set to one of the following:

- EBADF (an invalid fd was given in one or more of the structures)
- EFAULT (the pointer to fds pointed outside of the process's address space)
- EINTR (a signal occurred before any requested event)
- EINVAL (the nfds parameter exceeded the RLIMIT_NOFILE value)
- ENOMEM (insufficient memory was available to complete the request)

```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <poll.h>

#define TIMEOUT 5

int main(void)
{
	struct pollfd fds[2];
	int ret;

	/* watch stdin for input */
	fds[0].fd = STDIN_FILENO;
	fds[0].events = POLLIN;

	/* watch stdout for ability to write (almost always true) */
	fds[1].fd = STDOUT_FILENO;
	fds[1].events = POLLOUT;

	/* All set, block! */
	ret = poll(fds, 2, TIMEOUT * 1000);
	if (ret == -1) {
		perror("poll");
		return 1;
	}

	if (!ret) {
		printf("%d seconds elapsed.\n", TIMEOUT);
		return 0;
	}

	if (fds[0].revents & POLLIN)
		printf("stdin is readable\n");

	if (fds[1].revents & POLLOUT)
		printf("stdout is writable\n");

	return 0;
}
```

####ppoll()

```C
#define _GNU_SOURCE

#include <poll.h>

int ppoll(struct pollfd *fds,
		  nfds_t nfds,
		  const struct timespec *timeout,
		  const sigset_t *sigmask);
```

###poll() versus select()
`poll()` system call is superior to `select()` for:

- `poll()` does not require that the user calculate and pass in as a parameter the value of the highest-numbered file descriptor plus one.
- `poll()` is more efficient for large-valued file descriptors.
- `select()`'s file descriptor sets are statically sized, introducing a trade-off: they are small, limiting the maximum file descriptor that `select()` can watch, or they are inefficient.
- With `select()`, the file descriptor sets are reconstructed on return, so each subsequent call must reinitialize them. The `poll()` system call separates the input(`events` field) from the output(`revents` field), allowing the array to be reused without change.
- The `timeout` parameter to `select()` is undefined on return.

##Kernel Internals
###The Virtual Filesystem
The virtual filesystem, occasionally also called a virtual file switch, is a mechanism of abstraction that allows the Linux Kernel to call filesystem functions and manipulate filesystem data without knowing--or even caring about--the specific type of filesystem being used.
###The Page Cache
The page cache is an in-memory store of recently accessed data from an on-disk filesystem.
###Page Writeback
- When free memory shrinks below a configurable threshold, dirty buffers are written back to disk so that the now-clean buffers may be removed, freeing memory.
- When a dirty buffer ages beyond a configurable threshold, the buffer is written back to disk. This prevents data from remaining dirty indefinitely.