#Advanced File I/O
##Scatter/Gather I/O
Scatter/gather I/O is a method of input and output where a single system call writes to a vector of buffers from a single data stream, or, alternatively, reads into a vector of buffers from a single data stream. An alternative name for this approach to input and output is vectored I/O. In comparison, the standard read and write system calls provide linear I/O.

Scatter/gather I/O provides serveral advantages over linear I/O methods:

- More natural coding pattern: If your data is naturally segmented--say, the fields of a predefined structure--vectored I/O allows for intuitive manipulation.
- Efficiency: A single vectored I/O operation can replace multiple linear I/O operations.
- Performance: In addition to a reduction in the number of issued system calls, a vectored I/O implementation can provide improved performance over a linear I/O implementation via internal optimizations.
- Atomicity: In contrast with multiple linear I/O operations, a process can execute a single vectored I/O operation with no risk of interleaving I/O from another process.

###readv() and writev()
```C
#include <sys/uio.h>

struct iovec {
	void *iov_base;		/* pointer to start of buffer */
	size_t iov_len;		/* size of buffer in bytes */
};

// reads count segments from the fd into iov
ssize_t readv(int fd,
			  const struct iovec *iov,
			  int count);

// writes at most count segments from the buffers
// described by iov into fd
ssize_t writev(int fd,
			   const struct iovec *iov,
			   int count);
```
On success, `readv()` and `writev()` return the number of bytes read or written, respectively. This number should be the sum of all count iov_len values. On error, the system calls return -1 and set errno as appropriate.

####writev() example
```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <sys/uio.h>

int main()
{
	struct iovec iov[3];
	ssize_t nr;
	int fd, i;

	char *buf[] = {
			"The term buccaneer comes from the word boucan.\n",
			"A boucan is a wooden frame used for cooking meat.\n",
			"Buccaneer is the West Indies name for a pirate.\n" };

	fd = open("buccaneer.txt", O_WRONLY|O_CREAT|O_TRUNC);
	if (fd == -1) {
		perror("open");
		return 1;
	}

	/* fill out three iovec structures */
	for (i = 0; i < 3; i++) {
		iov[i].iov_base = buf[i];
		iov[i].iov_len = strlen(buf[i])+1;
	}
	/* with a single call, write them all out */
	nr = writev(fd, iov, 3);
	if (nr == -1) {
		perror("writev");
		return 1;
	}
	printf("wrote %d bytes\n", nr);

	if (close(fd)) {
		perror("close");
		return 1;
	}
	
	return 0;
}
```
####readv() example
```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <sys/uio.h>

int main()
{
	char foo[48], bar[51], baz[49];
	struct iovec iov[3];
	ssize_t nr;
	int fd, i;

	fd = open("buccaneer.txt", O_RDONLY);
	if (fd == -1) {
		perror("open");
		return 1;
	}
	
	/* set up our iovec structures */
	iov[0].iov_base = foo;
	iov[0].iov_len = sizeof(foo);
	iov[1].iov_base = bar;
	iov[1].iov_len = sizeof(bar);
	iov[2].iov_base = baz;
	iov[2].iov_len = sizeof(baz);

	/* read into the structures with a single call */
	nr = readv(fd, iov, 3);
	if (nr == -1) {
		perror("readv");
		return 1;
	}
	
	for (i = 0; i < 3; i++)
		printf("%d: %s", i, (char*)iov[i].iov_base);

	if (close(fd)) {
		perror("close");
		return 1;
	}

	return 0;
}
```
##Event Poll
Both `poll()` and `select()` require the full list of file descriptors to watch on each invocation. The kernel must then walk the list of each file descriptor to be watched. When the list grows large--it may contain hundreds or even thousands of file descriptors--walking the list on each invocation becomes a scalability bottleneck.

Epoll circumvents this problem by decoupling the monitor registration from the actual monitoring. One system call initializes an epoll context, another adds monitored file descriptors to or removes them from the context, and a third performs the actual event wait.

###Creating a New Epoll Instance
```C
#include <sys/epoll.h>

int epoll_create1(int flags);
/* deprecated. use epoll_create1() in new code. */
int epoll_create(int size);
```
A successful call to `epoll_create1()` instantiates a new epoll instance and returns a file descriptor associated with the instance. This file descriptor has no relationship to a real file; it is just a handle to be used with subsequent calls using the epoll facility. The `flags` parameter allows the modification of epoll behavior. Currently, only EPOLL_CLOEXEC is a valid flag. It enables close-on-exec behavior.

On error, the call returns -1 and sets errno to one of the following:

- EINVAL (invalid flags parameter)
- EMFILE (the user has reached their limit on the total number of open files)
- ENFILE (the system has reached its limit on the total number of open files)
- ENOMEM (insufficient memory was available to complete the operation)

```C
int epfd;

epfd = epoll_create1(0);
if (epfd < 0)
	perror("epoll_create1");
```
The file descriptor returned from `epoll_create1()` should be destroyed via a call to `close()` after polling is finished.

###Controlling Epoll
```C
#include <sys/epoll.h>

int epoll_ctl(int epfd,
			  int op,
			  int fd,
			  struct epoll_event *event);

struct epoll_event {
	__u32 events; /* events */
	union {
		void *ptr;
		int fd;
		__u32 u32;
		__u64 u64;
	} data;
};
```
Here are valid values for the `op` parameter:

- EPOLL_CTL_ADD (add a monitor on the file associated with the fd to the epoll instance associated with epfd, per the events defined in event)
- EPOLL_CTL_DEL (remove a monitor on the file associated with the fd from the epoll instance associated with epfd)
- EPOLL_CTL_MOD (modify an existing monitor of fd with the udpated events specified by event)

The `events` field in the epoll_event structure lists which events to monitor on the given file descriptor. Multiple events can be bitwise-ORed together. Here are valid values:

- EPOLLERR (an error condition occurred on the file)
- EPOLLET (enables edge-triggered behavior for the monitor of the file. the default behavior is level-triggered)
- EPOLLHUP (a hangup occurred on the file. this event is always monitored, even if it's not specified)
- EPOLLIN (the file is available to be read from without blocking)
- EPOLLONESHOT (after an event is generated and read, the file is automatically no longer monitored. A new event mask must be specified via EPOLL_CTL_MOD to reenable the watch)
- EPOLLOUT (the file is available to be written to without blocking)
- EPOLLPRI (there is urgent out-of-band data available to read)

The `data` field inside the event_poll structure is for the user's private user. The contents are returned to the user upon receipt of the requested event. The common practice is to set `event.data.fd` to fd, which makes it easy to look up which file descriptor caused the event.

Upon success, `epoll_ctl()` returns 0. On failure, the call returns -1 and sets errno to one of the following values:

- EBADF (epfd is not a valid epoll instance, or fd is not a valid file descriptor)
- EEXIST (op was EPOLL_CTL_ADD, but fd is already associated with epfd)
- EINVAL (epfd is not an epoll instance, epfd is the same as fd, or op is invalid)
- ENOENT (op was EPOLL_CTL_MOD, or EPOLL_CTL_DEL, but fd is not associated with epfd)
- ENOMEM (insufficient memory to process the request)
- EPERM (fd does not support epoll)

```C
// add a new watch on fd
struct epoll_event event;
int ret;

event.data.fd = fd;
event.events = EPOLLIN | EPOLLOUT;

ret = epoll_ctl(epfd, EPOLL_CTL_ADD, fd, &event);
if (ret)
	perror("epoll_ctl");

// modify an existing event on fd
struct epoll_event event;
int ret;

event.data.fd = fd;
event.events = EPOLLIN;

ret = epoll_ctl(epfd, EPOLL_CTL_MOD, fd, &event);
if (ret)
	perror("epoll_ctl");

// remove an existing event on fd
struct epoll_event event;
int ret;

ret = epoll_ctl(epfd, EPOLL_CTL_DEL, fd, &event);
if (ret)
	perror("epoll_ctl");
```

###Waiting for Events with Epoll
```C
#include <sys/epoll.h>

int epoll_wait(int epfd,
			   struct epoll_event *events,
			   int maxevents,
			   int timeout);
```
A call to `epoll_wait()` waits up to timeout milliseconds for events on the files associated with the epoll instance epfd. Upon success, events points to memory containing epoll_event structures describing each event--such as file ready to be written to or read from--up to a maximum of maxevents events. The return value is the number of events, or -1 on error, in which case errno is set to one of the following:

- EBADF (epfd is not a valid fd)
- EFAULT (the process does not have write access to the memory pointed at by events)
- EINTR (the system call was interrupted by a signal before it could complete or the timeout expired)
- EINVAL (epfd is not a valid epoll instance, or maxevents is equal to or less than 0)

If timeout is 0, the call returns immediately, even if no events are available, in which case the call will return 0. If the timeout is -1, the call will not return until an event is available)
```C
#define MAX_EVENTS 64

struct epoll_event *events;
int nr_events, i, epfd;

events = malloc(sizeof(struct epoll_event) * MAX_EVENTS);
if (!event) {
	perror("malloc");
	return 1;
}

nr_events = epoll_wait(epfd, events, MAX_EVENTS, -1);
if (nr_events < 0) {
	perror("epoll_wait");
	free(events);
	return 1;
}

for (i = 0; i < nr_events; i++)
	printf("event=%ld on fd=%d\n",
			events[i].events,
			events[i].data.fd);

free(events);
```

###Edge- Versus Level-Triggered Events
If the EPOLLET value is set in the events field of the event parameter passed to `epoll_ctl()`, the watch on fd is edge-triggered, as opposed to level-triggered.

Level-triggered is the default behavior. It is how `poll()` and `select()` behave, and it is what most developers expect. Edge-triggered behavior requires a different approach to programming, commonly utilizing nonblocking I/O, and careful checking for EAGAIN.

Assume you have a file descriptor from which you are reading. With level-triggered epoll behavior, you'll receive a notification so long as the file descriptor is ready for reading. It is the level of the line that causes notification. With edge-triggered, you'll receive the notification but once, when the data first becomes readable: it is the edge, or the change, that causes notification.
##Mapping Files into Memory
###mmap()
A call to `mmap()` asks the kernel to map len bytes of the object represented by the file descriptor fd, starting at offset bytes into the file, into memory. If addr is included, it indicates a preference to use that starting address in memory. The access permissions are dictated by prot, and additional behavior can be given by flags.
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

void *mmap(void *addr, 
			size_t len,
			int prot,
			int flags,
			int fd,
			off_t offset);
```
The addr parameter offers a suggestion to the kernel of where best to map the file. It is only a hint; most users pass 0. The call returns the actual address in memory where the mapping begins.

The port parameter describes the desired memory protection of the mapping. It may be either PORT_NONE, in which case the pages in this mapping may not be accessed(rarely useful!), or a bitwise OR of one or more of the following flags:

- PORT_READ (the pages may be read)
- PORT_WRITE (the pages may be written)
- PORT_EXEC (the pages mayb be executed)

The flags argument describes the type of mapping and some elements of its behavior. It is a bitwise OR of the following values:

- MAP_FIXED (instructs mmap() to treat addr as a requirement, not a hint)
- MAP_PRIVATE (states that the mapping is not shared. The file is mapped copy-on-write, and any changes made in memory by this process are not reflected in the actual file, or in the mappings of other processes)
- MAP_SHARED (shares the mapping with all other processes that map this same file. Writting into this mapping is equivalent to writing to the file. Reads from the mapping will reflect the writes of other processes)

The `mmap()` system call operates on pages. Both the addr and offset parameters must be aligned on a page-sized boundary. If the len parameter provided by the caller is not aligned on a page boundary, the mapping is rounded up to the next full page. The bytes inside this added memory and the end of the mapping, are zero-filled.

```C
#include <unistd.h>

long sysconf(int name);

long page_size = sysconf(_SC_PAGESIZE);

int getpagesize(void);
```

####Return values and error codes
On success, a call to `mmap()` returns the location of the mapping. On failure, the call returns MAP_FAILED and sets errno appropriately. A call to `mmap()` never returns 0. Possible errno values include:

- EACCESS (the given fd is not a regular file, or the mode with which it was opened conflicts with prot or flags)
- EAGAIN (the file has been locked via a file lock)
- EBADF (the given fd is not valid)
- EINVAL (one or more of the parameters addr, len, or off are invalid)
- ENFILE (the system-wide limit on open files has been reached)
- ENODEV (the filesystem on which the file to map resides does not support memory mapping)
- ENOMEM (the process does not have enough memory)
- EOVERFLOW (the result of addr+len exceeds the size of the address space)
- EPERM (PROT_EXEC was given, but the filesystem is mounted noexec)

####Associated signals
Two signals are associated with mapped regions:

- SIGBUS (the signal is generated when a process attempts to access a region of a mapping that is no long valid--eg, because the file was truncated after it was mapped)
- SIGSEGV (the signal is generated when a process attempts to write to a region that is mapped read-only)

###munmap()
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int munmap(void *addr, size_t len);
```
A call to `munmap()` removes any mappings that contain pages located anywhere in the process address space starting at addr, which must be page-aligned, and continuing for len bytes.

On success, `munmap()` returns 0; on failure, it returns -1, and errno is set appropriately. The only standard errno is EINVAL, which specifies that one or more parameters were invalid.

###Mapping Example
```C
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>

int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
	struct stat sb;
	off_t len;
	char *p;
	int fd;
	
	if (argc < 2) {
		fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <file>\n", argv[0]);
		return 1;
	}
	
	fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
	if (fd == -1) {
		perror("open");
		return 1;
	}
	
	if (fstat(fd, &sb) == -1) {
		perror("fstat");
		return 1;
	}
	
	if (!S_ISREG(sb.st_mode)) {
		fprintf(stderr, "%s is not a file\n", argv[1]);
		return 1;
	}
	
	p = mmap(0, sb.st_size, PORT_READ, MAP_SHARED, fd, 0);
	if (p == MAP_FAILED) {
		perror("mmap");
		return 1;
	}
	
	if (close(fd) == -1) {
		perror("close");
		return 1;
	}
	
	for (len = 0; len < sb.st_size; len++)
		putchar(p[len]);
	
	if (munmap(p, sb.st_size) == -1) {
		perror("munmap");
		return 1;
	}
	
	return 0;
}
```
###Advantages of mmap()
- Reading from and writing to a memory-mapped file avoids the extraneous copy that occurs when using the `read()` or `write()` system calls, where the data must be copied to and from a user-space buffer.
- Aside from any potencial page faults, reading from and writing to a memory-mapped file does not incur any system call or context switch overhead. It is simple as accessing memory.
- When multiple processes map the same file object into memory, the data is shared among all the process. Read-only and shared writable mappings are shared in their entirety; private writable mappings have their not-yet-COW pages shared.
- Seeking around the mapping involves trivial pointer manipulations. There is no need for the `lseek()` system call.

###Disadvantages of mmap()
- Memory mappings are always an integer number of pages in size. Thus, the difference between the size of the backing file and an integer number of pages is "wasted" as slack space.
- The memory mappings must fit into the process's address space. With a 32-bit address space, a large number of various-sized mappings can result in fragmentation of the address space, making it hard to find large free contiguous regions.
- There is overhead in creating and maintaining the memory mappings and associated data structures inside the kernel.

###Resizing a Mapping
```C
#define _GNU_SOURCE

#include <sys/mman.h>

void *mremap(void *addr, size_t old_size,
			 size_t new_size, unsigned long flags);
```

A call to `mremap()` expands or shrinks mapping in the region `[addr, addr+old_size)` to the new size `new_size`.

The `flags` parameter can be either 0 or MREMAP_MAYMOVE, which specifies that the kernel is free to move the mapping if needed to perform the requested resizing. A large resizing is more likely to succeed if the kernel can move the mapping.

####Return values and error codes
On success, `mremap()` returns a pointer to the newly resized memory mapping. On failure, it returns MAP_FAILED and sets errno to one of the following:

- EAGAIN (the memory region is locked and cannot be resized)
- EFAULT (some pages in the given range are not valid pages in the process's address space, or there was a problem remapping the given pages)
- EINVAL (an argument is invalid)
- ENOMEM (the given range cannot be expanded without moving (and MREMAP_MAYMOVE was not give), or there is not enough free space in the process's address space)

###Changing the protection of a mapping
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int mprotect(const void *addr,
             size_t len,
			 int prot);
```

A call to `mprotect()` will change the protection mode for the memory pages contained in `[addr, addr+len)`, where addr is page-aligned. The prot parameter accepts the same value as the prot given to `mmap()`: `PORT_NONE`, `PORT_READ`, `PORT_WRITE`, and `PORT_EXEC`.

###Synchronizing a File with a Mapping
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int msync(void *addr, size_t len, int flags);
```

A call to `msync()` flushes back to disk any changes made to a file mapped via `mmap()`, synchronizing the mapped file with the mapping. Specifically, the file or subset of a file associated with the mapping starting at memory address addr and continuing for len bytes is synchronized to disk. The addr argument must be page-aligned; it is generally the value from a previous `mmap()` invocation.

Without invocation of `msync()`, there is no guarantee that a dirty mapping will be written back to disk until the file is unmapped.

`flag` parameter is a bitwise OR of the following values:

- MS_SYNC (specifies that synchronization should occur synchronously)
- MS_ASYNC (specifies that synchronization should occur asynchronously)
- MS_INVALIDATE (specifies that all other cached copies of the mapping be invalidated)

###Giving advice on a mapping
Linux provides a system call named `madvise()` to let processes give the kernel advice and hints on how they intend to use a mapping. The kernel can then optimize its behavior to take advantage of the mapping's intended use.

A call to `madvise()` advises the kernel on how to behave with respect to the pages in the memory map starting at addr, and extending for len bytes:
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int madvise(void *addr,
			size_t len,
			int advice);
```
If len is 0, the kernel will apply the advice to the entire mapping that starts at addr.	The parameter advice delineates the advice, which can be one of:

- MADV_NORMAL (no specific advice to given)
- MADV_RANDOM (the application intends to access the pages in the specified range in a random order)
- MADV_SEQUENTIAL (intends to access the pages in the specified range sequentially, from lower to higher addresses)
- MADV_WILLNEED (intends to access the pages in the specified range in the near future)
- MADV_DONTNEED (does not intend to access the pages in the specified range in the near future)

##Advice for Normal File I/O

####The posix_fadvise() System Call
```C
#include <fcntl.h>

int posix_fadvise(int fd,
				  off_t offset,
				  off_t len,
				  int advice);
```
A call to `posix_fadvise()` provides the kernel with the hint `advice` on the file descriptor `fd` in the interval `[offset, offset+len)`. The available advice options are similar to those for `madvise()`. Exactly one of the following should be provided for advice: `POSIX_FADV_NORMAL`, `POSIX_FADV_RANDOM`, `POSIX_FADV_SEQUENTIAL`, `POSIX_FADV_WILLNEED`, `POSIX_FADV_NOREUSE` AND `POSIX_FADV_DONTNEED`.

###The readahead() system call
```C
#define _GUN_SOURCE

#include <fcntl.h>

ssize_t readahead(int fd,
				  off64_t offset,
				  size_t count);
```
A call to `readahead()` populates the page cache with the region `[offset,offset+count)` from fd.

##Synchronized, Synchronous, and Asynchoronous Operations
A synchronous write operation does not return until the written data is--at least--stored in the kernel's buffer cache. A synchronous read operation does not return until the read data is stored in the user-space buffer provided by the application. On the other side of the coin, an asynchronous write operation may return before the data leaves user space; an asynchronous read operation may return before the data is available.

A synchronized operation is more restrictive and safer than a merely synchronous operation. A synchronized write operation flushes the data to disk, ensuring that on-disk data is always synchronized vis-a-vis the corresponding kernel buffers. A synchronized read operation always returns the most up-to-date copy of the data, presumably from the disk.

In sum, the terms synchronous and asynchronous refer to whether I/O operations wait for some event before returing. The terms synchronized and nonsynchronized, meanwhile, specify exactly what event must occur.

Table: Synchronicity of write operations

<table>
	<tr>
		<th></th>
		<th>Synchronized</th>
		<th>Nonsynchronized</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Synchrounous</td>
		<td>Write operations do not return until the data is flushed to disk. This is the behavior if O_SYNC is specified during the file open.</td>
		<td>Write operations do not return until the data is stored in kernel buffers. This is the usual behavior.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Asynchronous</td>
		<td>Write operations return as soon as the request is queued. Once the write operation ultimately executes, the data is guaranteed to be on disk.</td>
		<td>Write operations return as soon as the request is queued. Once the write operation ultimately executes, the data is guaranteed to at least be stored in kernel buffers.</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Table: Synchronicity of read operations

<table>
	<tr>
		<th></th>
		<th>Synchronized</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Synchrounous</td>
		<td>Read operations do not return until the data, which is up-to-date, is stored in the provided buffer(this is the usual behavior).</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Asynchronous</td>
		<td>Read operations return as soon as the request is queued, but when the read operation ultimately executes, the data returned is up-to-date.</td>
	</tr>
</table>

###Asynchronous I/O
```C
#include <aio.h>

/* asynchronous I/O control block */
struct aiocb {
	int aio_fildes;			/* file descriptor */
	int aio_lio_opcode;		/* operation to perform */
	int aio_reqprio; 		/* request priority offset */
	volatile void *aio_buf; /* pointer to buffer */
	size_t aio_nbytes;		/* length of operation */
	struct sigevent aio_sigevent; /* signal number and value */
	
	/* internal, private members follow... */
};

int aio_read(struct aiocb *aiocbp);
int aio_write(struct aiocb *aiocbp);
int aio_error(const struct aiocb *aiocbp);
int aio_return(struct aiocb *aiocbp);
int aio_cancel(int fd, struct aiocb *aiocbp);
int aio_fsync(int op, struct aiocb *aiocbp);
int aio_suspend(const struct aiocb * const cblist[],
				int n,
				const struct timespec *timeout);
```

##I/O Schedulers and I/O Performance