#Process Management
##Programs, Processes, and Threads
A program is compiled, executable code lying dormant on a storage medium such as a disk.

A process is a running program. A thread is the unit of activity inside of a process. Each thread has its own virtualized processor, which includes a stack, processor state such as registers, and an instruction pointer.

##The Process ID
Each process is represented by a unique identifier, the process ID.

###Process ID Allocation
By default, the kernel imposes a maximum process ID value of 32768. This is compatibility with older Unix systems, which used signed 16-bit types for process IDs. The kernel allocates process IDs to processes in a strictly linear fashion.

###The Process Hierarchy
The process that spawns a new process is known as the parent; the new process is known as the child. Each process is owned by a user and a group. This ownership is used to control access rights to resources. Each process is also part of a process group, which simply express its relationship to other processes.

###pid_t
Programmatically, the process ID is represented by the pid_t type, which defined in the header file `<sys/types.h>`.

###Obtaining the Process ID and Parent Process ID
The `getpid()` system call returns the process ID of the invoking process:

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

pid_t getpid(void);
```

The `getppid()` system call returns the process ID of the invoking process's parent:

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

pid_t getppid(void);
```

##Running a New Process
###The Exec Family of Calls

```C
#include <unistd.h>

int execl(const char* path,
		  const char* arg,
		  ...);
		  
// the following code replaces the currently executing program with /bin/vi
int ret;

ret = execel("/bin/vi", "vi", NULL);
```

A call to `execl()` replaces the current process image with a new one by loading into memory the program pointed at by path. The parameter arg is the first argument to this program. The ellipsis signifies a variable number of arguments--the `execl()` function is variadic. The list of arguments must be NULL-terminated.

A successful `execl()` call changes not only the address space and process image, but also other attributes of the process:

- Any pending signals are lost.
- Any signals that the process is catching are returned to their default behavior, as the signal handlers no longer exist in the process's address space.
- Any memory locks are dropped.
- Most thread attributes are returned to the default values.
- Most process statistics are reset.
- Anything related to the process's memory address space, including any mapped files, is created.
- Anything that exists solely in user space, including features of the C library, such as `atexit()` behavior, is cleared.

Some properties of the process, however, do not change. For example, the pid, parent pid, priority, and owning user and group all remain the same.

Normally, open files are inherited across an exec. This means the newly executed program has full access to all of the files open in the original process.

####The rest of the family

```C
#include <unistd.h>

int execlp(const char* file,
		   const char* arg,
		   ...);

int execle(const char* path,
		   const char* arg,
		   ...,
		   char * const envp[]);

int execv(const char* path, char *const argv[]);

int execvp(const char* file, char * const argv[]);

int execve(const char* filename,
		   char *const argv[],
		   char *const envp[]);
```

The l and v delineate whether the arguments are provided via a list or an array. The p denotes that the user's full path is searched for the given file. The e notes that a new environment is also supplied for the new process.

###The fork() system call

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

pid_t fork(void);
```

A successful call to `fork()` creates a new process, identical in almost all aspects to the invoking process. The new process is called the "child" of the original process, which in turn is called the "parent". In the child, a successful invocation of `fork()` returns 0. In the parent, `fork()` returns the pid of the child. The child and the parent process are identical in nearly every facet, except for a few necessary differences:

- The pid of the child is, of course, newly allocated and different from that of the parent.
- The child's parent pid is set to the pid of its parent process.
- Resource statistics are reset to zero in the child.
- Any pending signals are cleared and not inherited by the child.
- Any acquired file locks are not inherited by the child.

####Copy-on-write

Copy-on-write is a lazy optimization strategy designed to mitigate the overhead of duplicating resources. Each consumer can be handed a pointer to the same resource. So long as no consumer attempts to modify its "copy" of the resource, the illusion of exclusive access to the resource remains, and the overhead of a copy is avoided.

####vfork()

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

pid_t vfork(void);
```

A successful invocation of `vfork()` has the same behavior as `fork()`, except that the child process must immediately issue a successful call to one of the `exec` functions or exit by `calling_exit()`. The `vfork()` system call avoids the address space and page table copies by suspending the parent process until the child terminates or executes a new binary image. In fact, the only work done during a `vfork()` is the duplication of internal kernel data structures. `vfork()` is faster than `fork()` because the page table entries need not be copied.

##Terminating a Process
```C
#include <stdlib.h>

void exit(int status);
```

A call to `exit()` performs some basic shutdown steps, then instructs the kernel to terminate the process.

Before terminating the process, the C library performs the following shutdown steps, in order:

1. Call any functions registered with `atexit()` or `on_exit()`, in the reverse order of their registration.
2. Flush all open standard I/O streams.
3. Remove any temporary files created with the `tmpfile()` function.

```C
#include <unistd.h>

void _exit(int status);
```
When a process exits, the kernel cleans up all of the resources that it created on the process's behalf that are no longer in use. This includes, but is not limited to, allocated memory, open files, and System V semaphores. After cleanup, the kernel destroys the process and notifies the parent of its child's demise.

`vfork()` users should call `_exit()`, and not `exit()`, after a fork.

###Other Ways to Terminate

```C
#include <stdlib.h>

int atexit(void (*function)(void));
```

A successful invocation of `atexit()` registers the given function to run during normal process termination, that is , when a process is terminated via either `exit()` or a return from `main()`. If a process invokes an exec function, the list of registered functions is cleared. If a process terminates via a signal, the registered functions are not called.

```C
#include <stdlib.h>

int on_exit(void (*function)(int, void*), void *arg);
```

This function works the same as `atexit()`, but the registered function's prototype is different.

When a process terminates, the kernel sends the signal `SIGCHLD` to the parent.

##Waiting for Terminated Child Processes

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>

pid_t wait(int *status);
```
A call to `wait()` returns the pid of a terminated child or -1 on error. If no child has terminated, the call blocks until a child terminates. The status pointer contains additional information about the child.

```C
#include <sys/wait.h>

// the standard provides a family of macros 
// for interpreting the parameter

int WIFEXITED(status);
int WIFSIGNALED(status);
int WIFSTOPPED(status);
int WIFCONTINUED(status);

int WEXITSTATUS(status);
int WTERMSIG(status);
int WSTOPSIG(status);
int WCOREDUMP(status);
```

###Waiting for a Specific Process
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>

pid_t waitpid(pid_t pid, int *status, int options);
```
The `status` parameter works identically to the sole parameter to `wait()` and can be operated on using the macros discussed previously.

The `options` parameter is a binary OR of zero or more of the following options:

- WNOHANG: do not block, but return immediately if no matching child process has already terminated(or stopped or continued)
- WUNTRACED: If set, the WIFSTOPPED bit in the returned parameter is set, even if the calling process is not tracing the child process.
- WCONTINUED: If set, the WIFCONTINUED bit in the returned status parameter is set even if the calling process is not tracing the child process.

###Even More Waiting Versatility
```C
#include <sys/wait.h>

int waipid(idtype_t idtype,
		   id_t id,
		   siginfo_t *infop,
		   int options);
```
As with `wait()` and `waitpid()`, `waitid()` is used to wait for and obtain information about the status change(termination, stopping, continuing) of a child process.

###BSD Wants to Play: wait3() and wait4()
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/time.h>
#include <sys/resource.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>

pid_t wait3(int *status,
			int options,
			struct rusage *rusage);

pid_t wait4(pid_t pid,
			int *status,
			int options,
			struct rusage *rusage);

#include <sys/resource.h>
struct rusage {
	struct timeval ru_utime; /* user time consumed */
	struct timeval ru_stime; /* system time consumed */
	long ru_maxrss; /* maximum resident set size */
	long ru_ixrss;  /* shared memory size */
	long ru_idrss;  /* unshared data size */
	long ru_isrss;  /* unshared stack size */
	long ru_minflt; /* page reclaims */
	long ru_majflt; /* page faults */
	long ru_nswap;  /* swap operations */
	long ru_inblock; /* block input operations */
	long ru_oublock; /* block output operations */
	long ru_msgsnd;  /* messages sent */
	long ru_msgrcv;  /* messages received */
	long ru_nsignals; /* signals received */
	long ru_nvcsw; /* voluntary context switches */
	long ru_nivcsw; /* involuntary context switches */
};
```

###Launching and Waiting for a New Process
```C
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE
#include <stdlib.h>

int system(const char *command);
```

###Zombies
As discussed earlier, a process that has terminated but has not yet been waited upon by its parent is called a "zombie". Zombie processes continue to consume system resources. These resources remain so that parent processes that want to check up on the status of their children can obtain information relating to the life and termination of those processes.

##Users and Groups
###Real, Effective, and Saved User and Group IDs
The real user ID is the uid of the user who originally ran the process. It is set to the real user ID of the process's parent, and does not change during an exec call.

The effective user ID is the user ID that the process is currently wielding. Permission verifications normally check against this value. Initially, this ID is equal to the real user ID, because when a process forks, the effective user ID of the parent is inherited by the child. Furthermore, when the process issues an exec call, the effective user is usually unchanged. But it is during the exec call that the key difference between real and effective IDs emerges: by executing a `setuid(suid)` binary, the process can change its effective user ID. To be exact, the effective user ID is set to the user ID of the owner of the program file.

The saved user ID is the process's original effective user ID. When the process forks, the child inherits the saved user ID of its parent. Upon an exec call, the kernel sets the saved user ID to the effective user ID.

The effective user ID is the value that matters: it's the user ID that is checked in the course of validating a process's credentials. The real user ID and saved user ID act as surrogates or potential user ID values that nonroot processes are allowed to switch to and from.

###Changing the Real or Saved User or Group ID
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int setuid(uid_t uid);
int setgid(gid_t gid);
```

###Changing the Effective User or Group ID
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int seteuid(uid_t uid);
int setegid(gid_t gid);
```

###Changing the User and Group IDs, BSD Style
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int setreuid(uid_t ruid, uid_t euid);
int setregid(gid_t rgid, gid_t egid);
```

###Changing the User and Group IDs, HP-UX Style
```C
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <unistd.h>

int setresuid(uid_T ruid, uid_t euid, uid_t suid);
int setresgid(gid_t rgid, gid_t egid, gid_t sgid);
```

###Preferred User/Group ID Manipulations
Nonroot processes should use `seteuid()` to change their effective user IDs. Root processes should use `setuid()` if they wish to change all three user IDs and `seteuid()` if they wish to temporarily change just the effective user ID.

###Obtaining the User and Group IDs
```C
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/types.h>

uid_t getuid(void);
gid_t getgid(void);

uid_t geteuid(void);
gid_t getegid(void);
```

##Sessions and Process Groups
##Daemons