#File and Directory Management
##Files and Their Metadata
An inode is both a physical object located on the disk of a Unix-style filesystem and a conceptual entity represented by a data structure in the Linux kernel. The inode stores the metadata associated with a file, such as the file's access permissions, last access timestamp, owner, group, and size, as well as the location of the file's data.

###The Stat Family
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int stat(const char *path, struct stat *buf);
int fstat(int fd, struct stat *buf);
int lstat(const char *path, struct stat *buf);

struct stat {
	dev_t st_dev;		/* ID of device containing file */
	ino_t st_ino;		/* inode number */
	mode_t st_mode;		/* permissions */
	nlink_t st_nlink;	/* number of hard links */
	uid_t st_uid;		/* user ID of owner */
	gid_t st_gid;		/* group ID of owner */
	dev_t st_rdev;		/* device ID (if special file) */
	off_t st_size; 		/* total size in bytes */
	blksize_t st_blksize; /* blocksize for filesystem I/O */
	blkcnt_t st_blocks; /* number of blocks allocated */
	time_t st_atime; 	/* last access time */
	time_t st_mtime; 	/* last modification time */
	time_t st_ctime; 	/* last status change time */
};
```

`stat()` returns information about the file denoted by the path `path`, while `fstat()` returns information about the file represented by the file descriptor `fd`. `lstat()` is identical to `stat()`, except that in the case of a symbolic link, `lstat()` returns information about the link itself and not the target file.

###Permissions
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>

int chmod(const char* path, mode_t mode);
int fchmod(int fd, mode_t mode);
```

Both `chmod()` and `fchmod()` set a file's permissions to mode. With `chmod()`, path denotes the relative or absolute pathname of the file to modify. For `fchmod()`, the file is given by the file descriptor fd.

###Ownership
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int chown(const char* path, uid_t owner, gid_t group);
int lchown(const char* path, uid_t owner, gid_t group);
itn fchown(int fd, uid_t owner, gid_t group);
```

`chown()` and `lchown()` set the ownership of the file specified by the path `path`. They have the same effect, unless the file is a symbolic file: the former follows symbolic links and changes the owership of the link target rather than the link itself, while `lchown()` does not follow symbolic links and therefore changes the ownership of the symbolic link file instead. `fchown()` sets the ownership of the file represented by the `fd` file descriptor.

###Extended attributes
Extended attributes, also called xattrs, provide a mechanism for associating key/value pairs with files. Extended attributes allow existing filesystem to support new features that weren't anticipated in their original designs, such as mandatory access controls for security.

####Retrieving an extended attribute
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <attr/xattr.h>

ssize_t getxattr(const char* path, const char* key,
				 void *value, size_t size);
ssize_t lgetxattr(const char* path, const char* key,
				 void *value, size_t size);
ssize_T fgetxattr(int fd, const char* key,
				 void *value, size_t size);
```

####Setting an extended attribute
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <attr/xattr.h>

int setxattr(const char* path, const char* key,
			 const void *value, size_t size, int flags);
int lsetxattr(const char* path, const char* key,
			 const void *value, size_t size, int flags);
int fsetxattr(int fd, const char* key,
			 const void *value, size_t size, int flags);
```

####Listing the extended attributes on a file
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <attr/xattr.h>

ssize_t listxattr(const char* path,
				  char *list, size_t size);
ssize_t llistxattr(const char* path,
				  char *list, size_t size);
ssize_t flistxattr(int fd,
				  char *list, size_t size);
```

####Removing an extended attribute
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <attr/xattr.h>

int removexattr(const char* path, const char* key);
int lremovexattr(const char* path, const char* key);
int fremovexattr(int fd, const char* key);
```

##Directories
In Unix, a directory is a simple concept: it contains a list of filenames, each of which maps to an inode number. Each name is called a directory entry, and each name-to-inode mapping is called a link.

###The Current Working Directory
####Obtaining the current working directory
```C
#include <unistd.h>

char *getcwd(char *buf, size_t size);
```

A successful call to `getcwd()` copies the current working directory as an absolute pathname into the buffer pointed by `buf`, which is of length `size` bytes and returns a pointer to `buf`.

####Chaning the current working directory
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int chdir(const char* path);
int fchdir(int fd);
```

A call to `chdir()` changes the current working directory to the pathname specified by `path`, which can be an absolute or relative pathname. Similarly, a call to `fchdir()` changes the current working directory to the pathname represented by the file descriptor `fd`, which must be opened against a directory.

###Creating Directories
```C
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <sys/types.h>

int mkdir(const char* path, mode_t mode);
```

###Removing Directories
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int rmdir(const char* path);
```

###Reading a Directory's Contents
To begin reading a directory's contents you need to create a directory stream, which is represented by a `DIR` object:

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <dirent.h>

DIR *opendir(const char* name);

// obtain the fd behind a given directory stream
int dirfd(DIR *dir);
```

####Reading from a directory stream
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <dirent.h>

struct dirent *readdir(DIR *dir);

struct dirent {
	ino_t d_ino; /* inode number */
	off_t d_off; /* offset to the next dirent */
	unsigned short d_reclen; /* length of this record */
	unsigned char d_type; /* type of file */
	char d_name[256]; /* filename */
};
```
A successful call to `readdir()` returns the next entry in the directory represented by `dir`.

####Closing the directory stream
```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <dirent.h>

int closedir(DIR *dir);
```

####System calls for reading directory contents
```C
#include <unistd.h>
#include <linux/types.h>
#include <linux/dirent.h>
#include <linux/unistd.h>
#include <errno.h>

int readdir(unsigned int fd,
			struct dirent *dirp,
			unsigned int count);
int getdents(unsigned int fd,
			 struct dirent *dirp,
			 unsigned int count);
```

##Links
A link is essentially just a name in a list(a directory) that points at an inode. Files can have 0, 1, or many links. Files with a link count of 0 have no corresponding directory entries on the filesystem. When a file's link count reaches 0, the file is marked as free, and its disk blocks are made available for reuse. Such a file, however, remains on the filesystem if a process has the file open. Once no process has the file open, the file is removed.

Another type of link, the symbolic link, is not a filesystem mapping, but a higher-level pointer that is interpreted at runtime.

###Hard Links
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int link(const char* oldpath, const char* newpath);
```

###Symbolic Links
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int symlink(const char* oldpath, const char* newpath);
```

###Unlinking
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int unlink(const char* pathname);
```
A successful call to `unlink()` deletes pathname from the filesystem.

##Copying and Moving Files
###Copying
In copying a file `src` to a file named `dst`, the steps are as follows:

1. Open `src`.
2. Open `dst`, creating it if it does not exist, and truncating it to zero length if it does exist.
3. Read a chunk of `src` into memory.
4. Write the chunk to `dst`.
5. Continue until all of `src` has been read and written to `dst`.
6. Close `dst`.
7. Close `src`.

###Moving
```C
#include <stdio.h>

int rename(const char* oldpath, const char* newpath);
```

##Device Nodes
Device nodes are special files that allow applications to interface with device drivers. Device nodes provide device abstraction so that applications do not need to be familiar with device specifics, or even master special interfaces. Indeed, device nodes are the standard mechanism for accessing hardware on Unix systems.

Each device node is assigned two numerical values, called a major and minor number. These major and minor numbers map to a specific device driver loaded into the kernel.

###Special Device Nodes
The null device has a major number of 1 and a minor number of 3. It lives at `/dev/null`. The device file should be owne by root and be readable and writable by all users. The kernel silently discards all write requests to the device. All read requests to the file return end-of-file(EOF).

The zero device lives at `/dev/zero` and has a major of 1 and a minor of 5. Like the null device, the kernel silently discards writes to the zero device. Reading from the device returns an infinite stream of null bytes.

The full device, with a major of 1 and a minor of 7, lives at `/dev/full`. As with the zero device, read requests return null characters(\0). Write requests, however, always trigger the ENOSPC error, signifying that the underlying device is full.

###The Random Number Generator
The kernel's random number of generators live at `/dev/random` and `/dev/urandom`. They have a major number of 1 and minor numbers of 8 and 9, respectively.

##Out-of-Band Communication
`ioctl()` allows for out-of-band communication:

```C
#include <sys/ioctl.h>

int ioctl(int fd, int request, ...);
```

##Monitoring File Events
Linux provides an interface, inotify, for monitoring files--for example, to see when they are moved, read from, written to, or deleted.

###Initializing inotify
Before a process can use inotify, the process must initialize it. The `inotify_init()` system call initializes inotify and returns a file descriptor representing the initialized instance:

```C
#include <sys/inotify.h>

int inotify_init1(int flags);
```

###Watches
After a process initializes inotify, it sets up watches. A watch, represented by a watch descriptor, is a standard Unix path, and an associated watch mask, which tells the kernel what events the process is interested in--for example, reads, writes, or both.

####Adding a new watch
The system call `inotify_add_watch()` adds a watch for the event or events described by mask on the file or directory path to the inotify instance represented by fd:

```C
#include <sys/inotify.h>

int inotify_add_watch(int fd,
					   const char* path,
					   uint32_t mask);
	
//				   
// watch masks
//
// IN_ACCESS : the file was read from
// IN_MODIFY : the file was written to
// IN_ATTRIB : the file's metadata was changed
// IN_CLOSE_WRITE : the file was closed and had been open for writing
// IN_CLOSE_NOWRITE : the file was closed and had not been open for writing
// IN_OPEN : the file was opened
// IN_MOVED_FROM : a file was moved away from the watched directory
// IN_MOVED_TO : a file was moved into the watched directory
// IN_CREATE : a file was created in the watched directory
// IN_DELETE : a file was deleted from the watched directory
// IN_DELETE_SELF : the watched object itself was deleted
// IN_MOVE_SELF : the watched object itself was moved
//
// IN_ALL_EVENTS : all legal events
// IN_CLOSE : all events related to closing
// IN_MOVE : all move-related events
```

###inotify Events
```C
#include <sys/inotify.h>

struct inotify_event {
	int wd; /* watch descriptor */
	uint32_t mask; /* mask of events */
	uint32_t cookie; /* unique cookie */
	uint32_t len; /* size of 'name' field */
	char name[]; /* null-terminated name */
};
```

####Reading inotify events
```C
int wd;
int fd;

fd = inotify_init1(0);
wd = inotify_add_watch(fd, "/etc", IN_ACCESS | IN_MODIFY);

char buf[BUF_LEN] __attribute__((aligned(4)));
ssize_t len, i = 0;

len = read(fd, buf, BUF_LEN);

while (i < len) {
	struct inotify_event *event = 
			(struct inotify_event *)&buf[i];
	printf("wd=%d mask=%d cookie=%d len=%d dir=%s\n",
			event->wd, event->len,
			event->cookie, event->len,
			(event->mask & IN_ISDIR) ? "yes" : "no");
	
	if (event->len)
		printf("name=%s\n", event->name);
		
	i += sizeof(struct inotify_event) + event->len;
}
```

####Advanced inotify events
In addition to the standard events, inotify can generate other events:

- IN_IGNORED : the watch represented by wd has been removed
- IN_ISDIR : the affected object is a directory
- IN_Q_OVERFLOW : the inotify queue overflowed
- IN_UNMOUNT : the device backing the watched object was unmounted

####Linking together move events
The IN_MOVED_FROM and IN_MOVED_TO events each represent only half of a move: the former represents the removal from a given location, while the latter represents the arrival at a new location. The cookie field, if nonzero, contains a unique value that links two events together.

###Advanced Watch Options
- IN_DONT_FOLLOW : If this value is set, and if the target of path or any of its components is a symbolic link, the link is not followed and `inotify_add_watch()` fails.
- IN_MASK_ADD : Normally, if you call `inotify_add_watch()` on a file on which you have an existing watch, the watch mask is updated to reflect the newly provided mask. If this flag is set in mask, the provided events are added to the existing mask.
- IN_ONESHOT : If this value is set, the kernel automatically removes the watch after generating the first event against the given object.
- IN_ONLYDIR : If this value is set, the watch is added only if the object provided is a directory. If path represents a file, not a directory, `inotify_add_watch()` fails.

###Removing an inotify watch
```C
#include <inotify.h>

int inotify_rm_watch(int fd, uint32_t wd);
```
A successful call to `inotify_rm_watch` removes the watch represented by the watch descriptor wd from the inotify instance fd and returns 0.

###Obtaining the Size of the Event Queue
```C
unsigned int queue_len;
int ret;

ret = ioctl(fd, FIONREAD, &queue_len);
```

###Destroying an inotify Instance
```C
int ret;

ret = close(fd);
```
Destroying an inotify instance, and any associated watches, is as simple as closing the instance's file descriptor.