#Memory Management
##The Process Address Space
###Pages and Paging
Page is the smallest addressable unit of memory that the memory management unit(MMU) can manage. Pages are either valid or invalid. A valid page is associated with an actual page of data, either in physical memory(RAM) or on secondary storage, such as a swap partition or file on disk. An invalid page is not associated with anything and represents an unused, unallocated piece of the address space. Accessing an invalid page results in a segmentation violation.

If a valid page is associated with data on secondary storage, a process cannot access that page until the data is brought into physical memory. When a process attempts to access such a page, the memory management unit generates a page fault. The kernel then intervenes, transparently paging in the data from secondary storage to physical memory.

####Sharing and copy-on-write
Multiple pages of virtual memory, even in different virtual address spaces owned by different processes, may map to a single physical page. This allows different virtual address spaces to share the data in physical memory.

The shared data may be read-only, writable, or both readable and writable. When a process writes to a shared writable page, one of two things can happen. The simplest is that the kernel allows the write to occur, in which case all processes sharing the page can see the results of the write operation.

Alternatively, the MMU can intercept the write operation and raise an exception; the kernel, in response, will transparently create a new copy of the page for the writing process, and allow the write to continue against the new page. We call this approach copy-on-write(COW).

###Memory Regions
The kernel arranges pages into blocks that share certain properties, such as access permissions. These blocks are called mappings, memory areas, or memory regions.

- The text segment contains a process's program code, string literals, constant variables, and other read-only data. In Linux, this segment is marked read-only and is mapped in directly from the object file(the program executable or a library)
- The stack contains the process's execution stack, which grows and shrinks dynamically as the stack depth increases and decreases. The execution stack contains local variables and function return data. In a multithreaded process, there is one stack per thread.
- The data segment, or heap, contains a process's dynamic memory. This segment is writable and can grow or shrink in size. `malloc()` can satisfy memory requests from this segment.
- The bss segment contains uninitialized global variables. These variables contain special values, per the C standard.

Linux optimizes these variables in two ways. First, because the bss segment is dedicated to uninitialized data, the linker(ld) does not actually store the special values in the object file. This reduces the binary's size. Second, when this segment is loaded into memory, the kernel simply maps it on a copy-on-write basis to a page of zeros, efficiently setting the variables to their default values.

##Allocating Dynamic Memory
```C
#include <stdlib.h>

void *malloc(size_t size);
```

###Allocating Arrays
```C
#include <stdlib.h>

void *calloc(size_t nr, size_t size);
```

###Resizing Allocations
```C
#include <stdlib.h>

void *realloc(void *ptr, size_t size);
```

###Freeing Dynamic Memory
```C
#include <stdlib.h>

void free(void *ptr);
```

###Alignment
####Allocating aligned memory
```C
#define _XOPEN_SOURCE 600
#define _GNU_SOURCE

#include <stdlib.h>

int posix_memalign(void *memptr,
				   size_t alignment,
				   size_t size);

// BSD an SunOS
void *valloc(size_t size);
void *memalign(size_t boundary, size_t size);
```

####Other alignment concerns

- The alignment requirement of a structure is that of its largest consituent type.
- Structures also introduce the need for padding, which is used to ensure that each constituent type is properly aligned to that type's own requirement.
- The alignment requirement of a union is that of the largest unionized type.
- The alignement requirement of an array is that of the base type.

##Managing the Data Segment
```C
#include <unistd.h>

int brk(void *end);
void *sbrk(intptr_t increment);
```
A call to `brk()` sets the break point(the end of the data segment) to the address specified by end.

A call to `sbrk()` increments the end of the data segment by increment bytes, which may be a positive or negative delta. `sbrk()` returns the revised break point.

##Anonymous Memory Mappings
Memory allocation in glibc uses a combination of the data segment and memory mappings. The classic method of implementing `malloc()` is to divide the data segment into a series of power-of-2 partitions and satisfy allocations by returning the partition that is the closest fit to the requested size. Freeing memory is as simple as marking the partition as "free".

This algorithm is called a buddy memory allocation scheme. It has the upside of speed and simplicity but the downside of introducing two types of fragmentation. Internal fragmentation occurs when more memory that requested is used to satisfy an allocation. External fragmentation occurs when sufficient memory is free to satisfy a request, but it is split into two or more nonadjacent chunks.

Generally, the heap is not shrunk after each free. Instead, the `malloc()` implementation keeps freed memory around for a subsequent allocation. Only when the size of the heap is significantly larger than the amount of allocated memory does `malloc()` shrink the data segment.

Consequently, for large allocations, glibc does not use the heap. Instead, glibc creates an anonymous memory mapping to satisfy the allocation request. An anonymous memory mapping is simply a large, zero-filled block of memory, ready for your use.

Allocating memory via anonymous mappings has several benefits:

- No framentation concerns. When the program no longer needs an anonymous memory mapping, the mapping is unmapped, and the memory is immediately returned to the system.
- Anonymous memory mappings are resizable, have ajustable permissions, and can receive advice just like normal mappings.
- Each allocation exists in a separate memory mapping. There is no need to manage the global heap.

Two downsides to using anonymous mappings rather than the heap:

- Each memory mapping is an integer multiple of the system page size in size.
- Creating a new memory mapping incurs more overhead than satisfying allocations from the heap, which may not invovle any kernel interaction whatsoever.

Juggling the pros against cons, glibc's `malloc()` uses the data segment to satisfy small allocations and anonymous memory mappings to satisfy large allocations.

###Creating Anonymous Memory Mappings
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

void *mmap(void *start,
		   size_t length,
		   int prot,
		   int flags,
		   int fd,
		   off_t offset);

int munmap(void *start, size_t length);

// give an example
void *p;

p = mmap(NULL,			/* do not care where */
		 512 * 1024,	/* 512 kB */
		 PORT_READ | PORT_WRITE, /* read/write */
		 MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_PRIVATE, /* anonymous, private */
		 -1, 			/* fd(ignored) */
		 0);			/* offset(ignored) */
```

###Mapping /dev/zero
Other Unix systems, such as BSD, do not have a MAP_ANONYMOUS flag. Instead, they implement a similar solution by mapping a special device file, /dev/zero. This device file provides identical semantics to anonymous memory. A mapping contains copy-on-write pages of all zeros; the behavior is thus the same as with anonymous memory.

```C
void *p;
int fd;

fd = open("/dev/zero", O_RDWR);

p = mmap(NULL, getpagesize(), PORT_RAED|PORT_WRITE,
		 MAP_RIVATE, fd, 0);

close(fd);
```

##Advanced Memory Allocation
```C
#include <malloc.h>

int mallopt(int param, int value);
// param:
// M_CHECK_ACTION
// M_MMAP_MAX
// M_MMAP_THRESHOLD
// M_MXFAST
// M_PERTRUB
// M_TOP_PAD
// M_TRIM_THRESHOLD
```
A call to `mallopt()` sets the memory-management-related parameter specified by param to the value specified by value.

###Fine-Tuning with malloc_usable_size() and malloc_trim()
```C
#include <malloc.h>

size_t malloc_usable_size(void *ptr);
```
A successful call to `malloc_usable_size()` returns the actual allocation size of the chunk of memory pointed to by ptr.

```C
#include <malloc.h>

int malloc_trim(size_t padding);
```
A successful call to `malloc_trim()` shrinks the data segment as much as possible, minus padding bytes, which are reserved.

##Debugging Memory Allocations
Programs can set the environment variable `MALLOC_CHECK_` to enable enhanced debugging in the memory subsystem.

```shell
$ MALLOC_CHECK_=1 ./rudder
```

###Obtaining Statistics

```C
#include <malloc.h>

struct mallinfo mallinfo(void);

struct mallinfo {
	int arena;	/* size of data segment used by malloc */
	int ordblks; /* number of free chunks */
	int smblks; /* number of fast bins */
	int hblks; /* number of anonymous mappings */
	int hblkhd; /* size of anonymous mappings */
	int usmblks; /* maximum total allocated size */
	int fsmblks; /* size of available fast bins */
	int uordblks; /* size of total allocated space */
	int fordblks; /* size of available chunks */
	int keepcost; /* size of trimmable space */
};
```
A call to `mallinfo()` returns statistics in a `mallinfo` structure.

```C
#include <malloc.h>

// print memory-related statistics to stderr
void malloc_stats(void);
```

##Stack-Based Allocations
```C
#include <alloca.h>

void *alloca(size_t size);
```
A call to `alloca()` returns a pointer to size bytes of memory. This memory lives on the stack and is automatically freed when the invoking function returns.

###Duplicating Strings on the Stack
```C
char *dup;

dup = alloca(strlen(song)+1);
strcpy(dup, song);

// Linux systems provide variants of strdup() that
// duplicate string onto the stack
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <string.h>

char *strdupa(const char* s);
char *strndupa(const char *s, size_t n);
```

###Variable-Length Arrays
C99 introduced variable-length arrays(VLAs), which are arrays whose geometry is set at runtime, not at compile time.
```C
for (i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
	char foo[i + 1];
}
```

##Choosing a Memory Allocation Mechanism
Table. Approaches to memory allocation in Linux

<table>
	<tr>
		<th>Allocation approach</th>
		<th>Pros</th>
		<th>Cons</th>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>malloc()</td>
		<td>Easy, simple, common.</td>
		<td>Returned memory not necessarily zeroed.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>calloc()</td>
		<td>Makes allocating arrays simple, zeros returned memory.</td>
		<td>Convoluted interface if not allocating arrays.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>realloc()</td>
		<td>Resizes existing allocations.</td>
		<td>Useful only for resizing existing allocations.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>brk() and sbrk()</td>
		<td>Provides intimate control over the heap.</td>
		<td>Much too low-level for most users.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Anonymous memory mappings</td>
		<td>Easy to work with, sharable, allow developer to adjust protection level and provide advice; optimal for large mappings.</td>
		<td>Suboptimal for small allocations; malloc() automatically uses anonymous memory mappings when optimal.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>posix_memalign()</td>
		<td>Allocates memory aligned to any reasonable boundary.</td>
		<td>Relatively new and thus portability is questionable; overkill unless alignment concerns are pressing.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>memalign() and valloc()</td>
		<td>More common on other Unix systems than posix_memalign().</td>
		<td>Not a POSIX standard, offers less alignment control than posix_memalign().</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>alloca()</td>
		<td>Very fast allocation, no need to explicitly free memory; great for small allocations.</td>
		<td>Unable to return error, no good for large allocations, broken on some Unix systems.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Variable-length arrays</td>
		<td>Same as alloca(), but frees memory when array falls out of scope, not when function returns.</td>
		<td>Useful only for arrays; alloca() freeing behavior may be preferable in some situations; less common on other Unix systems than alloca().</td>
	</tr>
</table>

##Manipulating Memory
###Setting Bytes
```C
#include <string.h>

void *memset(void *s, int c, size_t n);

#include <strings.h>
void bzero(void *s, size_t n);
```

###Comparing Bytes
```C
#include <string.h>

int memcmp(const void *s1, const void *s2, size_t n);
```
An invocation compares the first n bytes of s1 to s2 and returns 0 if the blocks of memory are equivalent, a value less than zero if s1 is less than s2, and a value greater than zero if s1 is greater than s2.

```C
#include <strings.h>

int bcmp(const void *s1, const void *s2, size_t n);
```

###Moving Bytes
```C
#include <string.h>
void *memmove(void *dst, const void *src, size_t n);
void *memcpy(void *dst, const void *src, size_t n);
void *memccpy(void *dst, const void *src, int c, size_t n);
void *mempcpy(void *dst, const void *src, size_t n);

#include <strings.h>
void bcopy(const void *src, void *dst, size_t n);
```

###Searching Bytes
```C
#include <string.h>

void *memchr(const void *s, int c, size_t n);
void *memrchr(const void *s, int c, size_t n);
void *memmem(const void *haystack,
			 size_t haystaklen,
			 const void *needle,
			 size_t needlelen);
```

###Frobnicating Bytes
```C
#include <string.h>

void *memfrob(void *s, size_t n);
```

##Locking Memory
###Locking Part of an Address Space
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int mlock(const void *addr, size_t len);
```

###Locking All of an Address Space
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int mlockall(int flags);
// MCL_CURRENT: lock all currently mapped pages-- the stack, data segment, mapped files, and so on--into the process's address space
// MCL_FUTURE: ensure that all pages mapped into the address space in the future are also locked into memory
```

###Unlocking Memory
```C
#include <sys/mman.h>

int munlock(const void *addr, size_t len);
int munlockall(void);
```

###Locking Limits
Processes possessing the CAP_IPC_LOCK capability may lock any number of pages into memory. Processes without this capability may lock only RLIMIT_MEMLOCK bytes.

###Is a Page in Physical Memory?
```C
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>

int mincore(void *start,
			size_t length,
			unsigned char *vec);
```
A call to `mincore()` provides a vector delineating which pages of a mapping are in physical memory at the time of the system call. The call returns the vector via vec and describes the pages starting at start(which must be page-aligned) and extending for length bytes(which must be page-aligned). Each byte in vec corresponds to one page in the range provided, starting with the first byte describing the first page and moving linearly forward.

##Opportunistic Allocation
Linux employs an opportunistic allocation strategy. This behavior has several advantages. First, lazily allocating memory allows the kernel to defer most of the work until the last possible moment--if indeed it ever has to satisfy 
the allocations. Second, because the requests are satisfied page-by-page and on demand, only physical memory in actual use need consume physical memory. Finally, the amount of committed memory can far exceed the amount of physical memory and even swap space available.

###Overcommitting and OOM
Overcommitting allows systems to run many more, and much larger, applications than they could if every requested page of memory had to be backed by physical storage at the point of allocation instead of the point of use.

When overcommitment results in insufficient memory to satisfy a committed request, we say that an out of memory(OOM) condition has occurred. In response to an OOM condition, the kernel employs the OOM killer to pick a process "worthy" of termination. For this purpose, the kernel tries to find the least important process that is consuming the most memory.

The kernel allows the disabling of overcommitment via the file `/proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory`, and the analogous `sysctl` parameter `vm.overcommit_memory`. A value of 2 disables overcommitments altogether and enables strict accounting. In this mode, memroy commitments are restricted to the size of the swap area plus a configurable percentage of physical memory. The configuration percentage is set via the file `/proc/sys/vm/overcommit_ratio` or the analogous `sysctl` parameter, which is `vm.overcommit_ratio`.